Complete rewrite of Getting Started guide (#1507)
Qiskit/qiskit: docs/deprecation_policy.rst

##################
Deprecation Policy
##################

Many users and other packages depend on different parts of Qiskit.  We need to
make sure that whenever we make changes to the code, we give users ample time to
adjust without breaking code that they have already written.

Most importantly: don't *change* any interface that is public-facing unless we
absolutely have to.  Adding things is ok, taking things away is discouraged

> but doable, while changing behavior is so difficult that it is best avoided.

Reviewer: I'd maybe word this a bit stronger. This document is our contract with our users about how and when we'd change things. But in general Qiskit is too eager to make breaking changes and we should try to push back against that here. 

The other thing I think worth calling out in a preamble is that we don't know how an API is necessarily being used or how widely it's being used. So we can't make assumptions around "nobody is using this" or "nobody depends on this behaviour"

Author: I've reworded and added your extra text in 09069fc0a.

The guiding principles are:

- we must not remove or change code without active warnings for least three
  months or two complete version cycles;

- there must always be a way to achieve valid goals that does not issue any
  warnings.

.. _removing-features:

Removing a feature
==================

When removing a feature (for example a class, function or function parameter),
we will follow this procedure:

#. The alternative path must be in place for one minor version before any
   warnings are issued.  For example, if we want to replace the function ``foo()``
   with ``bar()``, we must make at least one release with both functions before
   issuing any warnings within ``foo()``.

   *Reason*: we need to give people time to swap over without breaking their

>    code as soon as they upgrade.

Reviewer: Did you want to mention `PendingDeprecationWarning` here. I like that we call it out in the old version, especially because it gives a good search string to find all the places to deprecate.

Author: Done in 09069fc0a.

> #. After one minor version, :ref:`issue the deprecation warnings

Reviewer: I don't understand "After one minor version" here. I assume you're talking about from the first point above, but not all deprecations are being replaced in a tick-tock pattern. I'd remove this beginning and just start with how to issue deprecation warnings, that or make this more general so it doesn't assume we're implementing the replacement immediately before deprecation.

Author: I've updated this to be clearer on both points - "After the alternative path has been in place for at least one minor version, ..."

   <issuing-deprecation-warnings>`.  Add a release note with a ``deprecations``
   section listing all deprecated paths, their alternatives, and the reason for
   deprecation.  :ref:`Update the tests to test the warnings

>    <testing-deprecated-functionality>`.

Author: Done (in the paragraphs after the bullet points) in 09069fc0a.  I didn't want to make the list too long to keep it easy to scan / refer back to, but I expanded the text below it.

   *Reason*: removals must be highly visible for at least one version, to
   minimize the surprise to users when they actually go.

#. Set a removal date for the old feature.  This must be at least three months
   after the version with the warnings was first released, and cannot be the
   minor version immediately after the warnings.  Add an ``upgrade`` release
   note that lists all the removals.  For example, if the alternative path was
   provided in ``0.19.0`` and the warnings were added in ``0.20.0``, the
   earliest version for removal is ``0.22.0``, even if ``0.21.0`` was released

>    more than three months after ``0.20.0``.

Reviewer 2: Oh I was confused by the term `minor` release here until you mention `patch` even though this is the standard semver language. Since we haven't reached 1.0 yet, maybe we should mention that `minor` release means changing the middle number e.g. `0.19.0` to `0.20.0`.

>    .. note::
> 
>       These are *minimum* requirements.  For removal of core features, give
>       users an extra minor version.

Reviewer: For some functionality I don't think even one extra release is sufficient. We shouldn't set an upper bound on the length of deprecation, just the minimum amount of time we can guarantee something will keep working. I think wording this like we had before as just:

```suggestion
   .. note::

      These are *minimum* requirements.  For removal of significant or core features, give
      users at least an extra minor version if not longer.
```

   *Reason*: there needs to be time for users to see these messages, and to give
   them time to adjust.  Not all users will update their version of Qiskit
   immediately, and some may skip minor versions.

> 

Author: This is part of the same point - I've just updated the wording to make that clearer.

Changing behavior
=================

Changing behavior without a removal is particularly difficult to manage, because
we need to have both options available for two versions, and be able to issue
warnings.  For example, changing the type of the return value from a function
will almost invariably involve making an API break, which is frustrating for
users and makes it difficult for them to use Qiskit.

The best solution here is often to make a new function, and then use :ref:`the
procedures for removal <removing-features>` above.

If you absolutely must change the behavior of existing code (other than fixing
bugs), you will need to use your best judgment to apply the guiding principles
at the top of this document.  The most appropriate warning for behavioral
changes is usually ``FutureWarning``.  Some possibilities for how to effect a
change:

- If you are changing the default behavior of a function, consider adding a
  keyword argument to select between old and new behaviors.  When it comes time,

>   you can issue a future warning if the keyword argument is not given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  you can issue a ``FutureWarning`` if the keyword argument is not given
```

  (*e.g.* if it is ``None``), saying that the new value will soon become the
  default.  You will need to go through the normal deprecation period for
  removing this keyword argument after you have made the behavior change.  This
  will take at least six months to go through both cycles.

- If you need to change the return type of a function, consider adding a new
  function that returns the new type, and then follow the procedures for
  deprecating the old function.

- If you need to accept a new input that you cannot distinguish from an existing
  possibility because of its type, consider letting it be passed by a different
  keyword argument, or add a second function that only accepts the new form.

.. issuing-deprecation-warnings:

> Issuing deprecation warnings

Reviewer 2: I notice there is a section covering similar content on the qiskit-terra CONTRIBUTING.md. Should we remove that section and simply link to here? https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#adding-deprecation-warnings

Author: We can consider it after this merges, but it doesn't hurt to have an extra call out in the Terra contributing guide to point to this as well, I think.

         "Qiskit Terra 0.20.0, and will be removed 3 months or more later. "
         "Instead, you should use qiskit.other_function().",
         category=DeprecationWarning,
         stacklevel=2,
      )
      # ... the rest of the function ...

Make sure you include the version of the package that introduced the deprecation
warning (so maintainers can easily see when it is valid to remove it), and what
the alternative path is.

Take note of the ``stacklevel`` argument.  This controls which function is
accused of being deprecated.  Setting ``stacklevel=1`` (the default) means the
warning will blame the ``warn`` function itself, while ``stacklevel=2`` will
correctly blame the containing function.  It is unusual to set this to anything
other than ``2``, but can be useful if you use a helper function to issue the
same warning in multiple places.

.. testing-deprecated-functionality:

Testing deprecated functionality
================================

Whenever you add deprecation warnings, you will need to update tests involving
the functionality.  The test suite should fail otherwise, because of the new
warnings.

> 

Reviewer: You should mention here that we need to continue testing the deprecated functionality to ensure it continues to work as is until the removal date.

Author: Done in 09069fc0a.

Deprecation Policy
##################

Many users and other packages depend on different parts of Qiskit.  We must
make sure that whenever we make changes to the code, we give users ample time to
adjust without breaking code that they have already written.

Most importantly: *do not* change any interface that is public-facing unless we
absolutely have to.  Adding things is ok, taking things away is annoying for
users but can be handled reasonably with plenty notice, but changing behavior
generally means users cannot write code that will work with two subsequent
versions of Qiskit, which is not acceptable.

Beware that users will often be using functions, classes and methods that we,
the Qiskit developers, may consider internal or not widely used.  Do not make
assumptions that "this is buried, so nobody will be using it"; if it is public,
it is subject to the policy.  The only exceptions here are functions and modules

> that are explicitly internal, *i.e.* those whose names begin with a leading

Reviewer 2: It's good that here provide explicit definition of "internal functions". What about modules? Which modules are considered internal? Thinking about my PR to move fake backends from `qiskit.test.mock` to `qiskit.providers.fake_provider`. Are things inside `qiskit.test` considered internal? If so, are there other folders consider internal as well (for example, `qiskit.utils`)?

#. The alternative path must be in place for one minor version before any
   warnings are issued.  For example, if we want to replace the function ``foo()``
   with ``bar()``, we must make at least one release with both functions before
   issuing any warnings within ``foo()``.  You may issue
   ``PendingDeprecationWarning``\ s from the old paths immediately.

   *Reason*: we need to give people time to swap over without breaking their
   code as soon as they upgrade.

#. After the alternative path has been in place for at least one minor version,
   :ref:`issue the deprecation warnings <issuing-deprecation-warnings>`.  Add a
   release note with a ``deprecations`` section listing all deprecated paths,
   their alternatives, and the reason for deprecation.  :ref:`Update the tests
   to test the warnings <testing-deprecated-functionality>`.

   *Reason*: removals must be highly visible for at least one version, to
   minimize the surprise to users when they actually go.

#. Set a removal date for the old feature, and remove it (and the warnings) when

>    reached.  This must be at least three months after the version with the

Reviewer 2: Do we set a specific removal date and remove it as soon as the date is reached? I thought we are going to just say it will be removed 3 months or later without providing a specific date.

In this comment, Matthew is suggesting to make the deprecation time even longer than 3 months. https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/1507#discussion_r886799834

Author: Yeah, the text says "at least three months" - that's the minimum.  Matt's comment mentions an ideal deprecation period of a year, which is something we'd _like_ to have in a fully mature project, but with the research status of Qiskit, it's not entirely achievable for everything right now.  We'll still try to give long deprecation periods, but I don't want to write "a year" into our contract with the users when we can't commit to it.

This text wasn't _entirely_ meant to mean we'll put a hard date in the actual messages, it was more for internal use.  That said, I do think that being clearer with users about when something will actually disappear is a good thing.

Reviewer 2: > I do think that being clearer with users about when something will actually disappear is a good thing.

I think that would be great. What are the ways we can communicate that if not putting a hard date in the deprecation message? I also feel that even us the developers lose track of the various deprecated features and forget to remove them when they should be removed. 

In fact I am not even sure we know when a feature should be removed beyond the 3 months minimum time. Matthew's comment suggests to extend the deprecation period as long as possible until we absolutely need to remove it while from discussions with others I get the impressions that we want to minimize the number of features being deprecated and therefore should remove them as soon as possible. 

Sorry if the answers to these questions are very obvious due to my lack of software development experience.

Author: Putting in a version number (rather than a date) for the removal is one way of doing that.  For remembering to effect these removals, we can try things like creating issues to remove and tagging them for particular milestones - that seemed to work ok for your work on `qiskit.test.mock`, for example.

We don't always know when the best time is, and it will be affected by use.  When we issue the warnings, we get user feedback (in places like the public Slack) from a wider audience about how that affects their workflows, and that gives us more information on when is best to go through with the removal.  We might delay that longer if the effects are larger than we anticipated (hopefully not), or stick to the contract if the backwards-compatibility support is holding us back from improving other things.
